In this section, we will explore
the versatility of SQL in
accessing and manipulating
various types of data,
specifically focusing on time
series data.
We will dive deeper into how
SQL can be effectively used
for handling time series data,
allowing for efficient and
robust data analysis.
This will include discussing
various SQL functions and
methods that are particularly
useful in the context of time
series data.
In the upcoming practical
exercise, we will be using
Jupyter Notebook to interact
directly with CrateDB.
This hands on approach will
enable us to create tables and
import the sample data that
we've discussed earlier.
We will then use SQL to query
this data and visualize the
results using Pandas data frames
and Plotly.
Throughout this exercise we will
explore the extensive SQL
querying capabilities of CrateDB.
This includes the use of
aggregations to summarize our
data, common table expressions
to simplify complex queries, and
window functions for advanced
calculations.
We will also cover the
interpolation of missing values
to ensure data continuity and
the calculation of moving
averages for trend analysis.
Furthermore, we will discuss the
use of joins to combine data
from different tables based on
common columns.
Lastly, we will go over the use
of JSON and Pandas data frames
for managing semi-structured
data.
This exercise will provide a
comprehensive overview of the
practical applications of CrateDB
in handling time series data.
We start by setting up our
environment, connecting to CrateDB
and preparing our data for
analysis.
All necessary dependencies can
be installed by running the pip
install command.
To work with our code examples,
a connection to a CrateDB
database cluster is essential.
This could be via a managed
CrateDB cloud instance or a
local setup, perhaps using
Docker.
Replace the placeholders with
your actual CrateDB credentials
to establish a secure
connection.
Once the connection string is
defined, we create an Engine
object in SQL Alchemy.
We turn to SQL to define the
structure for our weather data
storage.
CrateDB speaks SQL, so it's
straightforward to create a
table with a structure that fits
our data set.
If you're using CrateDB Cloud,
there is a convenient option to
import your weather data
directly through an integrated
import feature available in the
Tutorials section of the CrateDB
Cloud Console.
If you haven't used the CrateDB
Cloud tutorial sample data, you
can load your data set using the
COPY FROM statement.
Here's an example command that
loads data from a CSV file
hosted on GitHub.
The result will indicate how
many records were loaded
successfully.
For instance, a response like
the following signifies a
successful data import of 70,000
records.
Let's now turn to data querying.
With SQL, we can easily
retrieve data and use Python to
load it into a pandas data frame
for further analysis.
For clarity reasons, we convert
the timestamps, which are stored
in CrateDB as big integers to
the Python date time format.
CrateDB is optimized for fast
aggregations thanks to its
columnar storage engine.
Here's an example where we
calculate the average
temperature for each location.
Using the AVERAGE function, we
can further enhance our query to
capture the highest and lowest
temperatures and their
corresponding times.
This is easily achieved with MAX
BY and MIN BY aggregation
functions that streamline the
process into a single query.
The next section of the notebook
illustrates how to use the Plotly
library to visualize data.
Such visualizations can quickly
reveal patterns and areas where
data might be missing.
The rest of the notebook
illustrates advanced SQL queries
and interpolations.
It gives you detailed
instructions on how to fill in
missing values using advanced
SQL features of CrateDB such as
window functions and common
table expressions.
By following the notebook you
will also learn how to calculate
moving averages and how CrateDB
support for JSON as a native
data type provides us with the
flexibility to handle dynamic
schema requirements and how to
handle these structures and
queries and pandas dataframes.
There are additional useful
functions available in CrateDB
that have not been covered in
the Jupyter notebook.
Data binning is useful to group
data by time based intervals,
for example every 10 seconds.
This function is also useful for
instance to harmonize non
equidistant events to correlate
them to equidistant events.
Some use cases might require a
sampling of the data set.
This can easily be achieved with
a modulo operator on the
internal doc id attribute.
Domain specific logic can be put
into user defined functions to
make it reusable in an easy and
consistent manner.
Here we calculate the
temperature in Fahrenheit from
degrees Celsius in a dedicated
function.
Please check the CreateDB
documentation for further
aggregation functions like hyper
log, log distinct for
approximate distinct counts or
array aggregation functions.